.TH BUS_CREATE 1 BUS-%VERSION%
.SH NAME
bus_create - Create a new bus
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <bus.h>

int bus_create(const char * \fIfile\fP, int  \fIflags\fP, char ** \fIout_file\fP);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR bus_create(3)
function creates a bus with the asscoiated pathname specifed by the
value of the parameter \fIfile\fP.  If \fIfile\fP is \fINULL\fP a random
pathname is selected.  This pathname adheres to the convention set forth
by
.BR bus(5).
.PP
If \fIfile\fP is not \fINULL\fP the
.BR bus_create(3)
function fails if the file already exists if \fIflags\fP contains
\fIBUS_EXCL\fP.  Otherwise if \fIfile\fP is not \fINULL\fP, the
.BR bus_create(3)
function does nothing if the file already exists.
.PP
If \fIflags\fP contains \fIBUS_INTR\fP, the function fails if it is
interrupted.
.PP
Unless \fIout_file\fP is \fINULL\fP, the pathname of the bus should be
stored in a new char array stored in \fI*out_file\fP.  The caller must
free the allocated stored in \fI*out_file\fP.
.SH RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the function returns 0.  Otherwise the
function return -1 with \fIerrno\fP set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B ENOMEM
The process cannot allocate more memory.
.PP
The
.BR bus_create(3)
function may also fail and set \fIerrno\fP to any
of the errors specified for the routines
.BR open(2)
and
.BR write(2).
.SH SEE ALSO
bus-create(1), bus(5), libbus(7), bus_unlink(3), bus_open(3), open(2), write(2)
.SH AUTHORS
Principal author, Mattias Andrée.  See the LICENSE file for the full
list of authors.
.SH LICENSE
MIT/X Consortium License.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to https://github.com/maandree/bus/issues or to
maandree@member.fsf.org
