.TH BUS_CHMOD 3 BUS-%VERSION%
.SH NAME
bus_chmod - Change bus mode bits
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
#include <bus.h>
.P
int bus_chmod(const char *\fIfile\fP, mode_t \fImode\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR bus_chmod ()
function gives access to the bus associated with \fIfile\fP
according to the following rules:
.TP
*
If (\fImode\fP &S_IRWXU) the owner should be given full access to the
bus.  Otherwise the owner should have no access.
.TP
*
If (\fImode\fP &S_IRWXG) the group should be given read and write
access to the bus.  Otherwise the group should have no access.
.TP
*
If (\fImode\fP &S_IRWXO) others (except the group) should be given
read and write access to the bus.  Otherwise others should have no
access.
.PP
The current permissions of a bus can be retrieved by running
.BR stat (3)
over the \fIpathname\fP of the bus.
.SH RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the function returns 0.  Otherwise the
function returns -1 and sets \fIerrno\fP to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
The
.BR bus_chown (3)
function may fail and set \fIerrno\fP to any of the
errors specified for
.BR bus_open (3),
.BR chmod (3),
.BR semget (3),
.BR shmget (3)
and
.BR shmctl (3)
as well as any errors specified for the \fIIPC_STAT\fP and
\fIIPC_SET\fP commands for
.BR semctl (3).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bus-create (1),
.BR bus (5),
.BR libbus (7),
.BR bus_open (3),
.BR bus_read (3),
.BR stat (3)
.SH AUTHORS
Principal author, Mattias Andrée.  See the LICENSE file for the full
list of authors.
.SH LICENSE
MIT/X Consortium License.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to https://github.com/maandree/bus/issues or to
maandree@member.fsf.org
